okay good morning everyone Let's uh Dive
Right In uh those taking the course for
graduate course uh for graduate credits
you are now working your way through the
differentiable assignments so far so
good okay assignment six for the
undergrads doing a little bit of
refactoring some spring cleaning before
we push on all good okay all right then
so back to our brief survey of the
history of evolutionary robo
we uh Are we almost finished lecture 9
last time looking at four of the initial
minimal cognition experiments trying to
evolve some of the building blocks of
intelligence into an autonomous machine
we got through three of the four
experiments last time we'll finish the
fourth and final one and then push on to
the last experiment in the minimal
cognition series which is yet another
building block of intelligence active
categorical uh perception
okay so uh again the idea behind minimal
cognition make a very very simple robot
is simple as you can simple physics
simple environment simple body handful
of Motors handful of sensors and let's
set up some environments and some
Fitness functions that select for some
of the building blocks of intelligence
like perceiving affordances then we
looked at uh discriminating between self
and non-self and we ended Last Time by
looking at this example of a robot that
can evolve short-term memory it can move
left and right along the bottom of the
screen it's got seven proximity sensors
but the twist in this experiment is the
moment the motors receive nonzero values
and the robot starts to move lights out
for the robot can't see anymore all
seven of the proximity sensors report
zero for the rest of the simulation and
we ended last time we ended last time
with this figure here as usual in the
midle M cognition experiments we're
playing back the best CNN that we got
back from The evolutionary algorithm the
most fit CNN drop it back into the robot
a whole bunch of times under different
environmental conditions and let's see
how well that evolved CNN allows the
robot to uh uh to generalize to
situations it did not see during
evolution in this case here uh they were
dropping uh an object that falls
straight down from the top of the screen
starting at different horizontal
positions at the top of the screen what
is the robot doing in this
case how well is the robot doing in this
case pretty well
yeah there's a few hints here about what
the robot is actually doing when armed
with this
ctrnn how is it solving this
problem to do like the Lin being
like
am so the robot definitely knows exactly
how much time it's going to take for the
object to hit the ground and how to move
to get there
yeah any other ideas it just seems like
like the closer is like uh like where
like the less units end the later it
starts to move so it's like it's trying
to time it perfectly so it'll hit it
like right last moment almost absolutely
yeah it's kind of showing off again
right it could get there faster but it's
sort of taking its
time you'll notice it does a
particularly poor job with the edge
cases the the two drops from the upper
left and the two drops from the upper
right and those trajectories are drawn
in Gray to show that at the end the
robot wasn't exactly where the object
hit it's having up a bit of a difficult
time with these cases why do you think
that
is is it's ravity like an acceleration
in this case versus like a linear speed
and so like for for cases where it's
close it's not really being affected by
the acceleration versus the far one uh I
you got the you got the tail end of it
here so um this is a very simple simple
physics engine there is no acceleration
the objects are just falling straight
down but you're right there's something
about the edge
cases that's a little bit harder for the
robot just be like motor speed just
there it could be motor speed um again
hiding a lot of details from you this
robot can move a lot faster than you see
here it's choosing to move at this so
it's not limited by its speed yep is it
not allowed to hit the walls there's no
walls there's a black box here but it
could move indefinitely to the left and
the
right any other ideas why is it having a
hard time with these edge cases is it
out of bounds the
sensors remember that these proximity
sensors before they turn off they're
pointed up in a cone so again like like
a cat's whiskers as the objects are
falling straight down the object is
stroking the tips of these proximity
sensors the values are f are firing at
nonzero values for a short period of
time but
then the object
passes uh underneath the cone of
perception here and of course the robot
could try and move to see the object
again but it can't right it goes blind
so in these four cases the robot is only
seeing the object for a very short
period of time it's got less information
and clearly it's kind of making a an
approximate guess about where the object
is eventually going to hit and it's not
perfect right from this point would
giving it the ability to like rotate its
field division would that like just
totally complicate it and make what
currently exist not work probably so if
we suddenly gave this evolve ctrn a a
different sensor motor apparatus so
suddenly the ctrn is getting values from
sensors that move or stay on when it's
expecting them to turn off probably not
going to do uh very well and again this
is the the elephant in the room for all
of AI and Robotics research if something
different happens in the real world from
what happened during training or
Evolution who knows what's going to
happen but usually something not great
is going to
happen okay I think the interest of time
we're a little bit behind I'm going to
skip over this um this kind of is more
or less what we've seen before the the
robot does okay but not
perfect okay let's have a look at one
last example here um so this is again uh
this is again one evolved CNN and in
this upper left plot here they're going
to drop an they're going to drop objects
from above again but they're going to
drop them at a
diagonal
they're going to take the same evolve
ctrnn put it back inside the robot a
whole bunch of times drop the object a
whole bunch of times from directly above
the robot but those objects are going to
fall at different
angles what does this C Evol this one
evolved CNN that we've been looking at
throughout here caused the robot to do
under these environmental
conditions
it seems to like move and then stop and
look again and then move it seems to
move and stop and look again
except the robot can't look again
remember that the moment it starts
moving it's completely
blind so it go it kind of goes to the
point that it predicts it'll fall to um
ver sorry it goes the point where it
predicts it'll fall to on like the
diagonal path okay not accounting for
the actual angle of the
turn could
be any other
observations what's with this zigzagging
motion you're right it's sort of it
stays still so all of these trajectories
that don't change angle until a certain
point this is the robot staying still
and presume presumably looking at the
object and quote unquote thinking about
the object integrating some information
over time combining what it's sensing
with memory and then it starts moving
which is what these jinking lines here
mean why is the robot moving and then
reversing course and then moving and
reversing course and getting there right
when the object hits is it like someone
ball and of move from side to side to
Maxim
cover is it that sort you're trying
to you're not quite so you
go you could right if your eyes are open
right you're going back and forth and
trying to estimate remember that as the
robot is jinking back and forth it
started moving it's completely
blind can it see during the SE when it's
not moving like between the two no it
can only see at the beginning so if
sorry this is a good point it it sees as
long as it stays motionless the moment
it starts moving it goes blind and if it
stops moving again it does not suddenly
see again it remains blind I'm sorry
that's an important detail it's blind
throughout these periods in which it's
moving back and forth but successfully
ending up where the object
is
why doesn't it move straight towards the
object at a constant rate as it does in
the case when the object is falling
directly from
above I'm throwing you a fast ball very
early in the morning this is a tough one
it's a bit of a trick question there's
no reason there's no benefit to moving
back and forth back and forth and
getting to the object and catching it
compared to moving at a constant rate
and catching it the only thing we said
is catch the ball make sure that your
horizontal distance is zero when the
object hits the ground be where the
object is the fitness function says
nothing about how the robot should move
to get there so in retrospect we get
back things that seem very inefficient
right why this extra
motion I wanted to spend a minute just
focusing on this point because this is
one of the uh inevitable results we get
from anything that's evolved you get
some things that are inefficient as long
as they're not an actual drag on the
organism or the machine yourself your
bodies and my body are filled with
inefficiencies we're not perfect mother
nature often leaves things just as they
are unless there's a very strong reason
to clean up or make that behavior or
that piece of physiology more efficient
this might matter for robotics we don't
want robots that are moving around in
the real world at very high
accelerations and decelerations and
doing extra stuff we'd like them
generally speaking to do just what we
want them to do and no more it's not
easy it's not trivial to make sure that
robots always do what we want them to do
in sort of the most efficient calm
constant predictable way other day sure
doesn't necessarily work that way is
there an idea just like across most of
the things of like just minimizing like
energy expenditure okay minimizing
energy expenditure so we may or may not
get to our uh lecture 11 today on the
biomechanics of motion absolutely when
we're talking about physical robots that
are big and heavy that have to move
around Energy Efficiency is pretty
important so things like this tend to go
away but there are other more subtle
ways of being inefficient and a little
bit unpredictable if you're the result
of an evolutionary process but a good
good point this is just sort of one of
the more obvious examples we're going to
see of this side effect of evolving
machines in this course yep if you
wanted to sort of let's say train out
some of that inefficiency would you
choose to adjust the fitness function or
cre
where that efficiency is naturally not
SEL or selected for or maybe both that's
a great question so if we wanted to get
rid of it where in The evolutionary
process would we put something to get
rid of it we could build a term into the
fitness function that penalizes for
Jewels actual amount of energy that's
used or we could create an environment
in which the best way to do the right
thing most of the time is to move in an
energy efficient manner um it's a great
question there is no one good answer to
that it is still an area of active
investigation if you want a machine to
be reliable energy efficient don't
accelerate decelerate suddenly how do
you go about ensuring that that happens
under conditions that it didn't see
during Evolution or during machine
learning training not an easy thing to
do good question okay let's keep going
all right fourth and final event that
we're going to look at um this is my
favorite one this is selective attention
this is something that we humans also
struggle with not an easy thing to do
let's have a look at our minimal robot
here again we have a minimal robot that
has two uh rockets that exert thrust to
move the robot back and forth along the
bottom of the screen you'll see that
it's seven proximity sensors are drawn
with solid rather than dashed lines this
robot does not go blind when it starts
moving it can move and sense at the same
time as always we're going to drop some
objects from the top of the screen in
this uh in the selective attention
experiment we're going to drop pairs of
objects but these objects are not
connected together they fall
independently as you can see from the
black dashed arrows here this particular
object is falling down into the left at
a slightly slower velocity than this
object object which is falling uh down
to the right at a faster velocity given
this cartoon Which of these two objects
is going to hit the ground
first one's closer but Falling slower
one's closer to the bottom of the screen
but Falling slower the other object is
further away from the robot but Falling
faster which one is going to hit the
ground
first um
is there is there like it would be the
object that has the um least distance to
fall to velocity ratio correct did you
have an idea in the back there I
was absolutely right so this is a
cartoon you kind of have to eyeball it
but it gives you a sense of the problem
here the challenge right you're
eyeballing this the robot's going to
have to do more or less the same thing
it's going to it's going to be able to
collect information and try and figure
this out it's got to
select Which object to attend to it's
going to see these objects and these
objects one's going to be closer to it
than the other which one does it go
chasing after first the fitness function
over here as you can see on the right
hand side of the equal sign there are
two terms and uh it shouldn't take you
long to figure out that these two terms
are selecting or are rewarding for the
robot minimizing its horizontal distance
to the first object when that object
hits the ground and
then minimize its horizontal distance to
the second object when the second object
hits the ground by first and second
object we mean the first object to hit
the ground and the second object to hit
the ground make sense
okay okay
uh a student who took this course
several years ago actually tackled this
as their final project and uh coded this
up in uh at that time we used open
Dynamics engine a different physics
engine so here is an evolved uh CNN
controlling a robot in the OD physics
engine that has evolved to successfully
exhibit selective
attention
you can see that some of these
environments are easier than
others
question so with this is all that
matters that the two circles are in view
at some
point all that matters is they they're
in view at some point right if one of
these objects never
touches any of these seven proximity
sensors or are never registered by any
of the seven proximity sensors the robot
by definition doesn't even know there's
a second object let alone know where
it's where and when it's going to
hit is the number of like kind of I I
guess recur that's not the word that you
use for like the connections to give
memory the recur recurrent Connections
in the ctrn give the robot memory Y is
there like a limit on how far like do
there like to remember like 50
iterations down the line that's a great
question so if you incorporate recurrent
connections into a ctrnn and hopefully
most of you realized that first of all
this ctrn does have recurrent
connections because the robot needs
memory in order to solve this task great
question how long can it remember
for turns out that even with a few we
won't do the math on the board but even
with a few recurrent connections if the
if the synaptic weights of a CN and the
time constants are tuned correctly by
Evolution it can remember for a pretty
long period of time it keeps passing uh
what it remembered from the previous
time step on to the next time step and
it keeps doing that you can kind of
actually work it out with pen and paper
if you're interested clearly it does
need to remember for quite a while right
I see both and I decide that I think I
think this one's going to hit first so I
go over to capture this one and I can no
longer see this one at all I need to
remember a bunch of things which side of
my body was it on when did I last see it
where was it how fast was it falling and
off I go and depending on how these are
falling I might need to go do something
over here for quite a long time from the
robot's perspective before it's able and
allowed to go back and do that yeah I
don't know about you all but every
morning I open up my to-do list and then
my stom just drops the number of things
that are on there I look at the one at
the top is that the one that's going to
hit the ground first in that any given
day maybe not I move it down move
another thing then suddenly a text comes
in does this go on the list what am I
doing after class I don't know selective
attention tricky for humans to do right
what are you going to do with the rest
of your day what's on your to-do list
how you to prioritize I often chase
after one task and completely forget
what the other one was and try and
recover and not an easy thing to do okay
David was very successful with this
project he and his robot make this task
look easy as you can probably guess it's
not easy by all means tackle this for a
final project but it is not one it is
not an easy option doable clearly but
not easy okay okay so what exactly is it
that makes this problem so difficult
like many non-trivial tasks us
intelligent machines uh try and Tackle
in the real world you can break that
hard problem down into multiple slightly
less hard sub problems there are two
important sub problems that any agent
needs to be able to uh succeed at in
order to succeed its selective attention
as a whole the first one is the passing
objects problem there may one object
that is initially further away from me
it feels like a less urgent task I can
worry about it later but wait a second
there's something about that distant
either literally or figuratively distant
task that tells me actually I should
attend to that one first it's actually
going to be the one that's going to
erupt uh sooner in the future than the
other one got to I've got to figure that
out first I can't just chase after the
one that's close
wouldn't that be nice that would be a
very easy way to deal with lots of
things throughout your day not so
simple then there's the object
permanence problem one of you comes up
at the end of class and asks me a
question verbally I tell you that I'm
going to respond to it later in the day
when I get to my email I go do a
thousand and3 other things and
completely forget to write you back the
object permanence problem right how do
we mentally juggle things that we've got
of remember to go back and attend to
later not easy in the minimal cognition
experiment we can make these cognitive
problems actually literal and watch the
robot evolve the ability to solve them
or not solve them make
sense okay all right so as always in the
minimal cognition experiments they
evolved and evolved and evolved and
evolved C tier and ends to get better
and better at the task and then plucked
the most fit CNN out of the last
generation of the evolutionary algorithm
dropped it back into the robot one two
three four five times and during those
five evaluations of that evolved ctrnn
they exposed it to increasingly more
difficult environments so in this
particular task we can actually quantify
the difficulty of an environment based
on whether or not that environment
challenges the robot to neither one or
both of these sub
problems here we go let's have a look
let's start by taking this one evolved
CNN we're going to drop it into the
robot and put that robot into an easy
environment it does not need to solve
the passing OB objects problem not Po
and it does not need to solve the object
permanence problem not open P what does
it mean for the robot to not have to
worry about the passing objects
problem the lower one is if they're
moving at the same speed they could be
moving at the same speed whatever it is
the one that's
closest is going to hit the ground first
right just go after the closest one that
makes it easy okay it also doesn't have
to solve the object permanence problem
what does that mean what does that tell
you about this
environment
they could be moving at the two objects
could be moving at a similar angle so
that they're always in view however it
is that the RO the objects are moving
the robot can more or less easily keep
them in
view this particular figure here is
drawn so that you can see that reality
so again it takes a little bit to parse
some of these minimal cognition figures
so we'll take our time
here you'll notice notice that there uh
there are two straight black lines
descending from the top of the figure
one of them descends to halfway down the
figure and the other straight black line
descends all the way to the bottom of
the figure and vertical axis here is
showing us time increasing as we descend
this figure what do those two straight
black lines
represent
the path of the object right why does
this first black trajectory stop at a
certain point what is that telling us
that the robot CAU it not necessarily
the robot C we're not even talking about
the robot yet just the two
objects that this this whatever this
object was it was falling straight down
and hit the ground at this time yeah
this object over here is continuing to
fall and it hits the ground at this time
the end of the
simulation what is the jinking black
trajectory
representing robot the robot's movement
right so tell me what the robot did in
this
situation how well did the robot do in
situation it's showing off again right
it figures out very quickly that it's
this object that's going to hit the
ground first which is the closest object
to it and it's jinking back and forth
underneath the object and then the
moment that it quote unquote catches the
object what is the robot
do straight over and again is showing
off going right staying right underneath
the object and catching
it what do the two gray parallel
represent what are the authors uh
illustrating here the darker gray
represents the object that's going to
hit the ground second and the lighter
gray represents what's going to hit
first uh you're right in the sense that
the two parallelograms correspond to the
two objects but not where they're going
to hit that's the tra that's what the
black the straight black trajectories
are telling
us it's got It's got to do with the
viewing angles it's got to do with the
robot's perception what exactly about
the robot's
perception uh that's a good guess they
could have probably visualized where
they think the robot is going to
hit the cone of view so if you imagine
taking a horizontal cut at any height
through one of these parallelograms what
that means is that the robot could be at
any point along that horizontal cut and
see that object the light gray
parallelogram corresponds to the object
that's going to hit first so let's take
this horizontal cut right at the top of
this figure this means the robot could
be anywhere at at these horizontal
positions at the bottom of the screen
and comfortably see the
object why are these P parallelograms
narrowing as time progresses in the
simulation
biger the the object reference to the
robot true the object is getting bigger
from the point of view of the robot
also absolutely right as as these
objects are approaching the stem of the
cone of perception there's a narrower
width through which the robot can move
and still see the object assuming it
wants to see it which it doesn't
necessarily need to do okay everybody
now see how to read these
figures okay all right you'll see that
the jinking trajectory stays within the
parallelograms the whole time actually
while there are two
parallelograms the uh robot is staying
within both of them which means it sees
both of them at the same time everybody
see that so no object permanence problem
it's easy for the robot to watch both
objects while waiting to catch the one
that it knows is going to hit the ground
first easy peasy the the Evolve ctrn
enables the robot to solve this task no
problem let's make things a little bit
more difficult and take the same evolve
CNN play it back in a different
environment in which now we're going to
expose it to one of the two sub problems
we're going to we're going to drop these
two objects at a different angle and
velocity so that now the CN is going to
be challenged to solve the passing OB
passing objects problem but still
doesn't need to worry about the object
permanence
problem when does this passing objects
problem
occur Dash horizont L the dashed
horizontal line is telling us the moment
at which the further object which is
falling faster passes the closer but
slower moving object yeah how is the
robot
doing
yeah is it still showing
off kind of you'll notice that at least
be above the dash line so this is what
where when the object that's going to
hit first is still further away from the
robot it kind of looks like maybe the
robot doesn't know right it's kind of
jinking back and forth under between the
two objects that are above it and it's
still doing that for a while but drifts
over and catches the first object and
then goes over and catches the second
one when does the robot know what's
going to happen when does does it
realize that the object that's further
away is going to hit the ground
first when it's no longer further away
looks that way right the robot could
actually be lazy in this case and just
wait wait until this happens sort of
watch both of them and say aha now
there's an object that's closer to me
and falling faster now it's easy and I
know what to do thinking about thinking
is misleading it's not quite clear the
robot might actually know beforehand
it's just not telling us that with its
Behavior who knows okay let's look at
the converse case same evolves CNN no
passing objects problem so the object
that's closer to the robot at the
beginning is falling faster but there's
an object permanence problem how
so yeah when the first object lands it's
in a situation where the robot cannot
see the second object absolutely right
so when the robot catches the first the
object that hits first that uh the the
cone of perception can see that first
object but now the robot is outside the
darker parallelogram so it doesn't it
cannot see that
object did it know where the object
is absolutely right just goes racing
over here and gets there with more than
enough time to capture the
object okay let's make things hard
passing object and object permanence
problem you can see the two straight
black lines are falling away from one
another so the objects are falling and
also increasing their relative
horizontal distance as they fall there's
our dashed horizontal line so one point
the further faster object passes the
closer slower object
how does the robot do in this
case it does well right it's kind of
showing off it knows it gets there in
plenty of time and then races over to
catch the other one and gets there just
in the nick of
time um for the robot moving back and
forth is it like possibly being impacted
by Randomness where it's not exactly
certain that like it's calculating the
velocities correctly so it's keeping its
options open to try to catch one object
or the other yeah that's a great
question the question is about is there
Randomness in the environment and maybe
it's not sure again I've left that
detail out no Randomness in in these
environments these are minimally complex
they've tried to remove everything they
can including Randomness which is
something that exists in the real world
do you know how the rememb where the
other object is or is that something
evolved in the CN it evolved in the
ctrnn who knows right you could probably
crack this open and spend 20 years
trying to figure out what's going on and
it's hard it's hard to see it in the
brain we can only really see it in the
behavior of the the robot did they have
to build
framewor all they told the robot all
they told the evolutionary algorithm is
evolve a CN that minimizes these two
terms that's it The evolutionary
algorithm is discovering sets of
synaptic weights time constants biases
gains that allow the
ctrnn
to allow the robot to achieve the task
nothing nothing in here explicitly says
do it by remembering do it by moving
back and forth in if you're uncertain be
sure to go chase after it as soon as
possible take as much time as you want
none of that just here's what we want
you figure out how to actually do
it um is like this is the speed of the
robot at all a limiting factor of like
like I see it has this like long
diagonal L if the motors were like more
powerful could it just get there quicker
that's a good question um I it's unclear
from the paper the authors were
insufficiently detailed it's not clear
whether this robot could actually move
faster in the video I showed you from
David's final project that was the
fastest the robot could move it it was
definitely hustling in here I'm not
sure other questions or
comments okay so we made things pretty
hard on the robot and it still did
excellent the fifth and final case we're
going to expose it to the passing
objects problem and the object
permanence problem again but we're going
to make both of those sub problems hard
how you can actually see how this task
is more difficult than this task the
robot can only see both of them at the
very beginning absolutely there's only a
very short time window in which the
robot can see both at the same time What
Happens immediately after that window of
time has
elapsed it knows it knows right somehow
now what it could have done it doesn't
there's nothing in here that says the
robot has to look at both at the same
time and compare uh the direction in
which they're falling and the speed at
which they're falling it could in theory
if it was quick enough go back and forth
and look at one and then look at the
other and then look at one and then look
at the other and still solve this task
but it looks pretty much like this robot
has quote unquote decided very quickly
the ctrnn has evolved to to compare uh
what it's to compare when it's looking
at both objects at the same time races
over and catches this one but this one
is falling away from where the other one
is this robot quickly reverses course
and gets back just in time to catch the
second
object all good okay all right that
concludes our lecture on minimal
cognition
in my personal opinion it's a shame not
many other people other people in the
community have followed up on these
experiments this feels to me like a good
way solid way to make progress on making
incrementally smarter and safe machines
right what you just saw was a whole
bunch of different ctrn that enabled the
the robot to do individual building
blocks of cognition you could imagine
revisiting the minimal cognition
experiments and combining some of these
Fitness functions evolving robots to
selectively attend and distinguish
between self and nonself and then also
perceive affordances and and and and and
maybe we could construct a very long
running evolutionary algorithm where
over evolutionary time we keep adding
terms to the fitness function to select
for more and more of these cognitive
building blocks and gradually build up
smarter and smarter and smarter machines
while ensuring that in a lot of
different other conditions they still do
more or less what we
expect how well do these things actually
like build on each other though like ex
nobody knows they were all done in
isolation how well do they build on one
another is it easier to evolve a robot
that selectively attends and then
evolves the ability to perceive
affordances or is it easier for
evolution to avoid a evolve a robot that
perceives affordances and then evolves
the ability to selectively attend what
order should it learn these things in um
if you're interested in machine learning
there is a whole branch of machine
learning outside of Robotics that
focuses that studies exactly this it's
called curriculum learning right in our
faculty meetings we argue all the time
about what order of courses you all
should take you need to take CS ABC and
then CDE it's not so obvious sometimes
to know in which order to learn things
so that you build more complex compet
competencies on top of simpler ones
tricky to do for humans also tricky to
set that up for machines yet another
open problem in robotics and
AI okay so we're going to dive into
lecture 10 now where we're going to look
at a fifth and final building block of
intelligence which is active categorical
perception this task is is uh not really
minimal because the robot that we're
going to look at is definitely not a
minimal robot it's got a pretty complex
physiology we'll come back to the robot
in a moment but first let's talk about
ACP I want you to uh I want you to join
me in the following thought uh um
hypothetical
experiment I'm going to Place several
objects in front of you but you're
blindfolded
and I want you to I'm going to give you
a task which is separate the round
objects from the edged objects you've
got blindfold on so you don't know what
these objects actually look
at you need to solve this task you need
to categorize you need to perceive and
categorize the round objects from the
edged objects what do you do what
actions do you perform to C between the
round and the edged
objects most people most human subjects
when they're given this actual problem
they grasp the object pick it up and
hold it I don't this one feel I don't
know but put their hand on top and go
back and forth like this and what
happens if you were to place your hand
on top of each of these objects one
after the other and do this motion what
happens some some of them roll and some
of them don't suddenly we have a binary
category some are rollable remember
affordances from last time some of these
objects are rollable and some are not if
you look at these objects obviously
there is no binary distinction right
there is a gradation from round to Edge
where does this category come
from it's almost like a magic trick
there is no set of round objects and a
separate non-overlapping set of edged
objects here and yet when you
interaction with interact with them
there it
is where does this set come from from
the
importance it's not the category is not
necessarily in the objects themselves
the category is in the relationship
between in this case not just an
observer but an active participant who
is manipulating the objects right you
categorize things tens of thousands of
times every day right friend foe cable
object non- citable object we're doing
it all the time we categorize things in
the world but in the world itself there
are no categories right they they arise
from the way that we interact with the
world
and Mother Nature has tuned our bodies
and brains over Millennia and Millennia
to exploit that phenomenon so that we
keep going and survive and reproduce and
so on so the idea behind active
categorical perception is as we move
about in the world or as we'll see in a
moment as machines move about in their
world they have a need to do this to
understand the affordance of affordances
of things what things are safe and what
things are
dangerous Mother Nature has tuned our
bodies and brains so that we interact
with those things in a certain way that
causes us to discover that category and
hopefully Discover it quickly especially
if we're trying to distinguish between
safe and not safe I have a two-year-old
at home and he's very interested in the
knives that are up on the kitchen table
right he's got to figure out the
difference between edged and non- edged
objects there's an infinite number of
actions that he can choose in which to
learn that lesson most of them are not a
good way to learn that lesson right we
have been tuned luckily so that we
choose particular actions and ways to
interact to learn these categories as
quickly and safely as possible as we do
as we learn to literally reach out and
manipulate objects in the world around
us
over time in in the human species over
years and years we learn to start to do
that interaction more and more from a
distance I'm categorizing which of you
is actually paying attention and which
isn't and luckily I don't need to reach
out and actually manipulate you to
figure it out I can categorize from a
distance how do we learn to get so good
at categorizing from a distance we
learned from when we were little
creatures by doing it actively
manipulating objects and feeling these
category literally feeling these
categories
arise it's easier to categorize objects
when we physically interact with them
than it is to categorize objects by
looking at them from a distance it
probably doesn't feel that way to you
because you've been doing it for a long
time it feels like categorizing things
in your world from a distance is super
easy thinking about thinking is mislead
in what's it called when when we're
younger we're we're doing things in a
certain way where it's easier and then
as we get better and better at solving
that easier task that sets us up to be
able to do it do the same task but in a
more difficult way we've heard this
phenomenon we've encountered this
phenomenon several times already is this
scaffolding this is
Scaffolding in Psychology the dominant
theory is that for a lot of intelligent
agents
ACP
scaffolds distal perception being able
to perceive sorry distal categorical
perception being able to categorize from
a distance it's still a theory there's a
lot of evidence from years and years of
observing little humans and big humans
this is something we could test in
robotics we're not going to test that
today we're just going to look at a
robot that's evolved to do
ACP sound good is that even like a
reason reble thing to distinguish
between active and distal categorical
processor because it's still an action
to move your eyes across great yes so
cam has swallowed the red pill
everything everything is embodied right
in an action even when we look around in
the world you are scotting the muscles
in your eyes are moving your eyes so
your eyes are jumping around and
touching different things in your visual
field yes it's not really it's not that
it's non-embodied
and it's not that it's passive it's
probably not a good term you're right
it's all active let's let's say proximal
going up and actually doing it close up
and personal and distal doing it from a
distance that would have probably been a
better uh pair of adjectives to describe
these two behaviors one I com to like in
robots isn't is is the finess of touch a
lot more difficult to do than like
distinction visually
great question so super easy to slap a
whole bunch of cameras onto a robot and
get tons and tons of highresolution data
at a high frame rate not so easy to make
skin for robots so that when the robot
touches something it gets Rich high
resolution data there is a whole
subfield of Robotics uh basically filled
with chemists and material scientists
and mechanical engineers that are making
sensitive skin for robots for exactly
this
reason okay all right so regardless of
whether we're talking about organisms or
machines If an organism or machine an
agent wants to succeed at ACP that agent
has to choose actions that reduce within
category differences when you sweep push
your your palm left and right along
across the top of these objects the ones
that are rollable start to feel similar
to you you feel this object and this
object and this object and this object
all rolling they're all rolling you're
feeling the collapse of within category
differences these objects are different
geometrically different but when you
interact with them in the right way that
difference feels less make
sense you're also trying to magnify
between category differences rollable
objects feel similar and non- rollable
or slidable or pushable objects feel
similar and those two sets of Sensations
are
different there's an infinite number of
ways that you could touch or manipulate
this these objects that do not do these
two things they all feel different they
all feel the same we're looking and
we're going to see in a moment evolution
is going to look for ways to move the
robot so that that robot reduces its
felt within category differences and
that those actions magnify the robots
felt between category
differences make
sense okay off we go all right let's
talk a little bit about the robot itself
we're going to as we've seen now several
times we're going to evolve populations
of CNN's we're going to take each CNN
and drop it into this robot lot o uh and
each CNN we're going to evaluate that CN
eight times we're going to replay that
CNN um eight times on the
robot uh in the first four cases in the
first four environments we're going to
place a sphere underneath the palm of
the robot but for each of these four
sphere placements we're going to place
the sphere at different rotational
angles which doesn't make a lot of sense
because it's a sphere it's radially
symmetric so from the robot's point of
view it doesn't feel any of those
differences in the fifth sixth seventh
and eighth evaluation of the ctrnn we're
going to place an ellipsoid underneath
the robot's uh Palm a little egg and in
each of those trials we're going to
start by placing that egg at a different
horizontal angle underneath the Palm
underneath the palm of the
robot everyone getting what this game is
the robot's going to have to quote
unquote tell us is it touching a sphere
or an
ellipsoid uh sorry I misspoke we're not
going to play each CNN eight times we're
going to play each CNN 16 times we're
going to start by setting the robot's
arm and hand to this initial position
eight times for these objects and then
the the 9th through 16th trial of a cinn
we're going to start those trials by
putting the robot's arm and hand to this
set of initial conditions and then again
expose it to these eight eight objects
question why did they do that why didn't
they just evolve the ctrnn to
distinguish between spheres and
ellipsoids with one initial setting of
the arm and hand good question
why different scenar in different
scenarios they're going to try they're
they want this robot to be as robust as
possible that under different conditions
under different conditions of the object
itself and possibly the robot and
therefore different conditions about the
initial initial relationship between the
robots posed and the object that it can
tell whether it's in contact with a
sphere or an
ellipsoid make sense okay all right
let's have a look at the robot's uh body
itself this is uh if you look at the
title of this paper uh active
categorical perception in an evolved
anthropomorphic robotic arm
anthropomorphic meaning in the shape of
an anthro in the shape of a human so
they're building in uh some additional
uh human physiology here let's look at
it luckily for you this should be
relatively familiar um we've got a
shoulder elbow and wrist and I'm sorry
this might be difficult to see from the
back of the room so I'll just turn out
the lights for a minute you'll notice
that there are actually two joints at
the shoulder in this robot they're going
to simulate all each individual joint is
a rotational joint like we've talked
about many times before already if we
put two of them together in the shoulder
that allows the robot's shoulder to do
this and to do this so the robot's
shoulder can basically do this you have
a third degree of freedom in your
shoulder which is this one right so you
can do this the robot can't it can only
do this so it's not quite human but it's
getting closer question so in simulators
do you actually just put two joints in
The Identical location with like
different
uh yeah so you can try this you can
actually try this out in pi bullet if
you want you can you can create one
object and connect it to you can create
one link and connect it to a second link
with a joint where that second link is
just a little sphere sitting inside the
shoulder and then you connect that
little sphere to another joint to a
third joint uh sorry connect it to a
third link with the second joint that's
at exactly the same location and you can
get this
if you think about it and play around
with it and pball it you can add three
in the same place and you can get a full
shoulder
joint Okay so we've got two motorized
joints in the shoulder um we've got a
third joint in the upper
arm it's not your elbow there's your
elbow it's not your shoulder show me
what it's simulating here exact it's
this
elbow is the fourth motorized joint that
one makes sense there's another one in
the forearm fifth one in the forearm
show me which one that one is we're
getting our stretching in this morning
yeah it's this this one here that's
number five six and
seven wrist this and this but
not uh that's that's number five right
five six seven good I can see you all
waving there you go you got the idea
okay so we're up to seven motorized
joints we're g to we're going to arm
this robot no pun intended in a moment
with the ctrnn we've got seven motor
neurons and then we got a whole bunch of
things going on in the
hand in the human body there is one part
of your body in which most sense organs
are localized second most uh part of
your body in which you have localized
sense organs the palms of your hands
because we're primates and we learn a
lot about the World by grasping objects
like this right okay let's see how this
works we've got if you can you might be
able to see this from the back 1 2 3 4
five 6 7 8 9 10 additional
joints which are uh causing the arm to
pull get I'm sorry I misspoke sorry 1 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 these are these little
gray circles these are 10 touch sensors
in the hand if you look carefully you'll
see there's a whole bunch of light blue
cylinders these are all
joints these are not independently
motorized joints you can move your
shoulder and not move your elbow you can
move your elbow
and not move your shoulder you have
independent muscle groups in your arm I
challenge you to move your I'm going to
turn the lights back on now I challenge
you to move your distal fangi which is
the tip of your finger and don't rotate
your intermediate and proximal fangi the
two bits of your finger that are closer
to your hand most of us cannot do it
there are some people that
can so we've got 20 I don't know how
many it is there's a whole bunch of
joints motorized joints in the hand
they're going to assign to all those
motorized joints one motor
neuron at every time step in the
simulation and I'll play the simulation
for you that motor neuron is outputting
one floating Point number and that
floating Point number is going to all of
the motorized joints in the hand
simultaneously which causes the hand to
do the robot's hand to do
what this yeah now of course we can do
this our fingers are independent they're
going to kind of sweep that detail under
the hood so a fair bit of human
physiology built into this robot why did
they do it I don't know maybe just for
fun could you
exp yes yes yes yes so um there's one
two three joints in the thumb and then
one two 3 one two 3 one two 3 one two 3
in the remaining four fingers so there
are 15 motorized joints in one hand of
the robot so far so good so you can
imagine coating this up in py bullet in
in pyrro Sim 15 motorized joints in
everything we've seen so far there was
always one motor neuron assigned to each
each motorized joint right in this case
there's one motor neuron that fires and
that that whatever that floating Point
number is coming out of the motor neuron
it's copied 15 times and sent to the 15
motorized joints so that they all apply
identical
torque which causes this this this this
this this this this robot cannot move
its fingers
identically make sense
okay all right that's the body of the
robot let's switch and look at the brain
of the robot this robot has a total of
one 48 total neurons in the CNN so its
brain has 48 neurons in it this is a CNN
so down here we've written out the
ordinary differential equation for the
ith
neuron since there are 48 neurons that
means there are 48 differential
equations that describe the behavior of
the CTI andn for this robot so far so
good okay I like this picture I like
this figure from the paper because they
bounce back and forth between the
mathematical description of a ctrnn and
a visual depiction of the CN so these
two things are identical if you still
feel Rusty about OD and C TNS and time
constants this is a good figure to put a
few minutes of effort into okay here we
go let's start with the visual
depiction this should be familiar we've
got a sensor layer here this robot has a
total of 22 sensor neurons uh in there
and here's the uppercase i sub this term
is sending in that that sensor value to
that s
neuron we've got 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
we've got eight internal or hidden
neurons and then we've got a whole bunch
of motor neurons up here so
actuator actuators Motors means the same
thing and then we've got two neurons out
here the last two neuron 47 and 48 these
are the categorizations
neurons the robot is going to light up
these two neurons to tell us whether it
thinks it's in contact with a sphere or
an
ellipsoid so far so good okay we've got
seven proprioceptive sensors in the arm
where are they what are they
reporting what in the arm are they
reporting
position or angles of the joints right
proception is joint angle so we've got
all the seven arm angles coming into the
brain of the robot we've got a total of
10 tactile
sensors the 10 touch sensors in the palm
of the hand and this is how they're
distributed throughout the palm of the
hand of the
robot and uh did I get that wrong hand
oh and hand propri receptive sensors
we've got five proi receptive sensors in
the hand where are those five propri
receptive
sensors tips of your fingers it it could
be the tips of the fingers it's not
clear from this picture it's the
curvature of the finger remember that
the finger the different parts of the
finger are all curling in together so
we've got five numbers reporting the
curvature of the five fingers but I just
finished telling you that each hand has
one motor neuron which closes or opens
the entire hand so why does it need five
different
numbers it's kind of like the difference
like in a so when it tries to squeeze
some objects are GNA
like I I guess like the hand squeezing
would like meet resistance the hand is
going to meet resistance depending on
exactly the minute it interacts with the
object that it's trying to categorize
those curvatures of the finger are going
to change right that's some pretty
important
information what's that it tells you
like the shape does it does it tell you
the shape maybe may be depends on how
you grasp the object I could grab the
object the top of the sphere and the
ellipsoid like this not so much I could
go like this and maybe it does there's
actually an infinite number of ways that
I could grasp an object some are better
than others at helping me to reduce
within category differences and
exaggerate between category differences
yeah yeah
okay okay uh so those are the sensor
neurons they're all sending their
floating Point numbers into the hidden
neurons what is this Arrow that's
curving back on itself telling
usur recurrent connection so this robot
May evolve the ability to remember if
that's
useful yeah I'm hiding that detail from
you this is the whole punchline of this
entire experiment the way they're going
to handle 47 and 48 is everything in
this experiment we'll get there in a
minute um for like the the architecture
of the
crn is there a reason they only have one
hidden layer versus like wouldn't having
just a little bit
yeah so that's a good question we could
add multiple layers of hidden neurons
and turn this into a deep
ctrnn as the Deep learning revolution
has taught us there's good reasons to do
this they didn't do this in this
experiment and this experiment was
published when the Deep learning
Revolution was just
starting okay all right we've got 14
motor neurons assigned to the arm that's
strange 14 motor neurons but there's
only seven
joints there's two motor neurons
assigned to each
joint this we also have not seen before
this seems strange why any
ideas is it so you can hold it in
specific positions because they'll have
two lock me up in certain spots so like
you can get like stuck here or here it's
like trying to keep moving all the way
in it just like stop you're getting
close right so we've got two motor
neurons that are sending values and kind
of tugging on the same motorized joint
remember that they're trying to create
an anthropomorphic robot a robot that in
in uh that instantiates some human
physiology what human physiology are we
talking about in this case that our mus
can only in
one the 14 motor neurons in here
although it's not shown on this figure
they only out put positive numbers they
pull with more or less Force this is
known as uh
antagonistic and
agonistic
agonistic muscle groups in all the major
muscle groups in your body they're all
arranged in pairs your bicep when it
pulls it flexes your arm in your tricep
when it pulls you extend your lower arm
muscles are like ropes they can only
pull they cannot push so all the major
muscle groups in the human body arranged
in pairs in which they antagonistically
or agonistically uh pull on the
motorized joint that's what they're
adding here do they actually need this
detail for this experiment absolutely
not they probably just put it in for
fun Okay Hand actuators we we I told you
that there's one motor there's one motor
neuron per hand I lied there's actually
two why
two is it like a push and a pull not a
pull push on the inside and then a sorry
a pull on the inside and a pull on the
outside same thing they're simulating
roughly Agonist and antagonistic muscle
pairs in the
hand okay so someone asked in the back
about uh ner neurons 47 and
48 let's have a look at those now so any
questions about the CNN it's actually
pretty much like everything we've seen
before just with some
additional uh anthropomorphic details
okay we got five minutes left so let's
dive in and talk about neurons 47 and 48
as was pointed out a moment ago they
could have got away with just one neuron
and they could the investig s could have
decided that the robot gets a fitness
point if when in the presence of a
sphere this neuron is negative and when
the robot is in the presence of an
ellipsoid this neuron should be positive
for example right they could encode that
as the way for the robot to tell us
whether it thinks it's in contact with
the sphere or an ellipsoid they could
have done that they didn't do that
they've got two
neurons with two neurons neurons you
could do something like if neuron the
value of neuron 47 is larger than the
value of neuron 48 that's the robot
telling us it thinks it's in the
presence of a sphere if the value of 48
is larger than the value of 47 that's
the robot telling us it thinks it's in
the presence of an ellipsoid could also
do that it's not what they did let's see
what they actually did they did
something much more complicated and I'm
going to draw this for
you we're going to draw this visually uh
in two Dimensions we're going to draw a
plot where we're going to uh we're going
to look at the values of neurons
47 and
48 I'm going to put y sub 48 and Y sub
47 to just remind us that we're going to
be looking at the value of the 47th
neuron and the value of the 48th neuron
let's imagine at uh let's imagine at the
beginning of a simulation we put the
robot's Palm on top of a sphere the
robot doesn't know yet whether it's in
contact with the sphere or an ellipsoid
and at the very first time step of the
simulation sorry we're going to put it
uh yeah we're going to put it in contact
with uh a sphere it doesn't know whether
it's in contact with either it's the
very first time step of the simulation
so the value of 47 is zero and the value
of the 48th neuron is also zero and now
the robot starts moving the ctrnn
transforms sensation into action and
suddenly the value of neuron 47 and 48
changes to a pair of nonzero
values time Step Zero time step one time
step three 4 5 6
7 and we get
this
trajectory in two-dimensional space
where the trajectory is showing how
these two values change over time over
the lifetime of a single simulation of
the robot in contact with the sphere so
far so good if any of you have taken a
dynamical systems course before this is
a way to visualize a dynamical system
meaning any system that changes its
Dynamics or its motion over time what is
this visualization called there's a name
for
it no okay uh if you do take uh
dynamical systems of course this is uh
sorry this is a phase diagram just in
case you hear that
term it's a nice way of showing how a
system changes over time okay let's
imagine this is the robot in contact
with um the sphere and we're going to
look and we're going to record uh we're
going to record the uh we're going to
look at the lowest and highest value of
47 and the lowest and highest value of
48 during the last 5% of the simulation
so this is the last 5% in here we
started with t subz down here and we
went to T final down here this is the
let's see this is the maximum value that
47 ever achieves during this short time
window and the minimum value of 47
during the shorttime window is this
little Point
here during this short time window here
the lowest value of 48 is this point
here and during this short time window
the maximum value of 48
is this point here that gives us this
little bounding box in two-dimensional
space and we're going to call that
little bounding box R sub it's the
rectangle that we place around the
spherical uh
object so far so good okay seems a
little strange for a moment bear with me
was there a question yes are you looking
at the of the we're looking at remember
that each point on this trajectory it
represents the those two neuron values
at that point in time so yes we're
taking the last little curvy point but
it's really we're trying to ask what was
the maximum and minimum value of these
two neurons at the last moment La we're
going to we're going to challenge the
robot to tell us whether it thinks it's
in the presence of the sphere or
ellipsoid during the last
5% of the simulation time we're going to
give it the rest of the time to quote
unquote figure things out I don't know a
t about them but does that diagram
eventually like have an orbit yeah you
got it right so um we can get into the
dynamical systems in which it drops into
an orbit and repeats itself if you plot
the position of the Earth in in uh three
three dimensions it will start to repeat
itself in a phase
diagram okay we're out of time for today
so let's pause here you have a quiz due
night undergrads you're refactoring grad
students you're starting in on
differentiable simulation have a good
rest of your week